Unset charset=utf-8 content-type for md/mdx pages (#12231)
withastro/astro: .changeset/strong-months-grab.md

---
'astro': major
---

> Updates Markdown page handling to no longer respond with `charset=utf-8` in the `Content-Type` header. This matches the rendering behaviour of other non-content pages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Changes the default character encoding handling for Markdown pages.

Markdown pages no longer respond with `charset=utf-8` in the `Content-Type` header. This matches the rendering behaviour of other non-content pages.
```
I'm wondering if we can get a strong (correct, of course!) statement for the intro here that's more plain language just to introduce the change?

Author: > Changes the default character encoding handling for Markdown pages.

I don't think the PR changes the default character encoding since we still add a `<meta charset="utf-8">` tag automatically if there's no layout (which is on a default setup). So I'm not sure this change is accurate here.

Reviewer: I guess I was trying to get a changes HOW character encoding is handled (even though you can still get the same character encoding; you might just have to do something different to get it) by default in Markdown pages, not changes the encoding itself.

If there is a helpful, accurate line to that effect that makes sense, I think it sets up the longer explanation nicely. But, non-blocking! No objections and I'll let you make the call!

Author: I updated it now to match the upgrade guide header. Let me know what you think!

Reviewer: Looks great!

> Instead, for Markdown pages without layouts, Astro will automatically add the `<meta charset="utf-8">` tag to the page by default. This reduces the boilerplate needed to write with non-ASCII characters. If your Markdown pages have a layout, the layout component should include the `<meta charset="utf-8">` tag.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead, Astro will automatically add the `<meta charset="utf-8">` tag to Markdown pages (`.md` or similar Markdown files located within `src/pages/`) that do not use Astro's special `layout` frontmatter property. This reduces the boilerplate needed to write with non-ASCII characters when adding individual Markdown pages to your site.

If your Markdown pages use the `layout` frontmatter property, then HTML encoding will be handled by the designated layout component instead, and the `<meta charset="utf-8">` tag will not be added to your page by default.
```

> If you require `charset=utf-8` to render your page correctly, make sure that your layout components have the `<meta charset="utf-8">` tag added.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you require `charset=utf-8` to render your page correctly, make sure that your layout components contain the `<meta charset="utf-8">` tag. You may need to add this if you have not already done so.
```
